content: add coredumps part 2 article (#569)
memfault/interrupt: _drafts/linux-coredumps-ii.md

---
title: Linux Coredumps (Part 2) － Shrinking the Core
description: Post Description (~140 words, used for discoverability and SEO)
author: blake
tags: [linux, coredumps, memfault, debugging]
---

In our previous article we outlined what a Linux coredump is, and how they work
under the hood. One common constraint we see in embedded Linux, however, is a

> limited amount of storage space. Whether we're trying to limit flash writes, or
> picked a small flash part to keep our BOM cost down, sometimes we just don't
> have enough space to store coredumps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
limited amount of storage space. Whether we're trying to limit writes to disk, or
need to reserve most of the disk space available to a device for other data, sometimes we just don't
have enough space to store coredumps.
```

I think something along these lines makes more sense in this context.

<!-- excerpt start -->

> In this article we'll go take a look at what makes a coredump, why they can be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this article we'll go take a look at what comprises a coredump, why they can be
```

> so large, and what we can strip away to make them smaller.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
so large, and what we can strip away to make them smaller while retaining critical debugging information.
```

<!-- excerpt end -->

{% include newsletter.html %}

{% include toc.html %}

## Defining The Minimum Coredump

If we want to reduce the size of a coredump, we must first define what is the
minimum set of information we need to still get a stacktrace. At a high level
this is fairly obvious. For a majority of programs, most of the mapped memory
will consumed by the heap. If we can cut this out we should already see the size
of our coredump go down quite a bit. Outside of this it's possible for
individual thread stacks to be quite large. If we could only capture the top N
bytes of each stack, we would have not only a smaller corecump, but a more
predictable size.

If we condense this down to a list we can see the following requirements for our
slim coredump:

- Limit each stack to the top N bytes
- Remove heap allocations
- Capture metadata needed for debuggers.

> By fullfilling the above requirements, we'll have a coredump that is of minimal
> size. This does, however, have two major tradeoffs. For one, any heap allocated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By fullfilling the above requirements, we'll have a coredump that stripped down to just the essentials. This does, however, have two major tradeoffs. For one, any heap allocated
```

values on the stack will not be resolved if they're on the stack, and obviously

> we willn not be able to look at heap allocated values at all. We have found this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we will not be able to look at heap allocated values at all. We have found this
```

to be an acceptable tradeoff, however, as most crashes can be debugged with just
the stacktrace and stack allocated variables.

The second tradeoff is that we're limiting the size of each stack. This does

> limit the depth of the stacktrace, but in general we have observed two things
> with coredumps. Typically the stacks are not that deep, and for those that are,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
limit the depth of the stacktrace, but in general we have observed two important characteristics of most coredumps. Typically the stacks are not that deep, and for those that are,
```

briefly touched on all the different types of `PT_NOTE` segments that existed.
One note in particular, `NT_PRSTATUS` is of interest here. This note contains
information about each process. Here[^prstatus] is the layout of the note
description:

```c
struct elf_prstatus_common
{
 struct elf_siginfo pr_info; /* Info associated with signal */
 short pr_cursig;  /* Current signal */
 unsigned long pr_sigpend; /* Set of pending signals */
 unsigned long pr_sighold; /* Set of held signals */
 pid_t pr_pid;
 pid_t pr_ppid;
 pid_t pr_pgrp;
 pid_t pr_sid;
 struct __kernel_old_timeval pr_utime; /* User time */
 struct __kernel_old_timeval pr_stime; /* System time */
 struct __kernel_old_timeval pr_cutime; /* Cumulative user time */
 struct __kernel_old_timeval pr_cstime; /* Cumulative system time */
};

struct elf_prstatus
{
 struct elf_prstatus_common common;
 elf_gregset_t pr_reg; /* GP registers */
 int pr_fpvalid;  /* True if math co-processor being used.  */
};
```

Of interest here is the `pr_reg` struct memmber. This has all of the general
purpose registers at the time of the crash. From here we can grab the PC of the

> thread, and search through all of the mapped memory regions. Once we find the

Reviewer: Do you think it's worth explaining how we "seach through all of the memory mapped regions" here?

mapped memory region in question we can grab the last N bytes before the PC.

Now we have just the memory from each thread! If we tried to load this into GDB,
however it wouldn't work. That's because we're missing some vital bits of debug
information. Let's take a look what these sections are, and how we can identify
them.

### `r_debug` - Debug Rendevous Structure

> When we write a Linux program, we're typically pulling in more code than what we
> directly compile in. These bits of code are loaded in at runtime, and are
> referred to as dynamically linked. Examples of these are `libc`, `libopenssl`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dynamic linking allows programs to call code from shared libraries on the system. For example. this can allow a single `libopenssl` binary to handle cryptography for a variety of applications without the full library binary needing to be included in each one. 
```

and many other common bits of functionality. Since our call stack could

> eventually enter thees linked libraries, we need to have some information on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
eventually enter these linked libraries, we need to have some information on
```

    char *l_name;  /* Absolute file name object was found in.  */
    ElfW(Dyn) *l_ld;  /* Dynamic section of the shared object.  */
    struct link_map *l_next, *l_prev; /* Chain of loaded objects.  */
  };
```

There is a lot going on here, but we're only going to concern ourselves with the
`l_addr` member of `link_map`. This tells GDB how to map the addresses we'll see
at runtime to the addresses present in the compiled ELF.

Now that we know how it's useful, how do we find it? To do that we need to look
at the `PT_DYNAMIC` program header. The `PT_DYNAMIC` structure contains a list
of tags and values. Here is its layout for a 64-bit system:

```c
  typedef struct {
    Elf64_Sxword    d_tag;
    union {
        Elf64_Xword d_val;
        Elf64_Addr  d_ptr;
    } d_un;
  } Elf64_Dyn;
  extern Elf64_Dyn _DYNAMIC[];
```

The `r_debug` structure is in this list of dynamic tags[^dynamic_entries]. It
can be found under the `DT_DEBUG` tag. We can iterate through all the tags,
extract the `r_debug` struct memory range for each, and add it to our coredump.

### Finding Mapped Build IDs and Headers

To be able to properly fetch the needed symbols for both our main executable,

> and all mapped libraries we need to collect some metadata on them. We need to

Reviewer: What does "mapped library" mean here?

get three things for each mapped file:

1. The ELF header
2. All program headers
3. The build ID note

This will give GDB the ability to properly fetch symbols for any parts of the
stacktrace that may have landed in the dynamic mapped sections of the program.

So how do we find this info? For that we'll have to take a peek into the values
inside `/proc/pid/maps`[^proc_pid_maps]. This contains all mapped memory for the

> given pid. This contains the mapped addresses of stacks, heaps, and importantly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
given PID (Process Identifier). This contains the mapped addresses of stacks, heaps, and importantly
```

for us the address of dynamically linked libraries.

For every mapped ELF file in the list, we can then extract the three bits of
information we mentioned above.

## Overall Size Savings

> TODO: Add size comparison

Reviewer 2: Just noticed this TODO -- did you have an idea of how you wanted to do the size savings? lmk if you need some help brainstorming this!

Author: Ooops I forgot about this too. I think I'm going to compare `memfaultctl` coredumps since those are fairly complex with allocations/dynamic libs.

Reviewer 2: Sounds good. Side note- in case you don't have the bandwidth to add this right now, we could add it later. It doesn't look to be essential to the flow of the article. Works for me either way 👍

Author: I just added it! I'll push a new commit in a second.

Reviewer 2: Looks great!

## Conclusion

We've now seen that we can trim down the overall size of our ELF coredump by

> stripping it down to the bare minimum needed to construct our stacktrace. This

Reviewer: ```suggestion
stripping it down to the bare minimum needed to construct a human-readable stacktrace. This
```
